RFC: light DOM scoped styles (#50)
salesforce/lwc-rfcs: text/0000-light-dom-scoped-styles.md

```

In this case, the `<span>` is dynamically inserted into the component's shadow DOM, but synthetic shadow DOM needs some way to monitor the DOM for changes so that it can apply the styling token. This is where `lwc:dom="manual"` comes in – it's a signal to add a `MutationObserver` to track changes.

This is a lot of extra machinery to support style scoping. Users need to know about `lwc:dom="manual"`, and the framework needs to create and disconnect a `MutationObserver`.

We would like to avoid this for light DOM style scoping, so we have a simpler system: dynamically-inserted elements are not scoped. Incidentally, this is how Vue and Svelte scoped styles work – there's no expectation that you can mutate the DOM with vanilla DOM APIs and still have the scoping token applied.

### Targeting the root element

With both global and scoped light DOM styles, it is possible to style the component's root element using e.g.:

```css
x-mycomponent {}
```

Note that this means that, in scoped light DOM styles, a light parent and light child can both style the child's root element. For instance:

```css
/* parent.scoped.css */
x-child {}
```

```css
/* child.scoped.css */
x-child {}
```

> This will result in two scoping tokens being applied to the `<x-child>` element – one from the parent, and another from the child. Precendence order is not guaranteed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will result in two scoping tokens being applied to the `<x-child>` element – one from the parent, and another from the child. Order of precedence is not guaranteed.

```

```html
<x-app>
  <style class="x-foo_foo" type="text/css">
    div.x-foo_foo { color: green; }
  </style>
  <div class="x-foo_foo">Hello</div>
</x-app>
```

## Motivation

For Light DOM ([#44](https://github.com/salesforce/lwc-rfcs/pull/44)), the default assumption is that styles are unscoped. In other words, a light DOM component essentially just contains `<style>` tags that are inserted into the DOM _in situ_. (The actual implementation may be slightly different, but this is the basic mental model.)

Many frameworks, however, have a concept of _scoped styles_, even without using shadow DOM. These offer good developer ergonomics, because developers can concentrate on the CSS co-located with a particular component, without worrying how that CSS might affect other components.

Prior art:

- [Vue: `<style scoped>`](https://vue-loader.vuejs.org/guide/scoped-css.html)
- [Svelte: scoped styles](https://svelte.dev/docs#style)
- [React: CSS Modules in `create-react-app`](https://create-react-app.dev/docs/adding-a-css-modules-stylesheet/)
- [Stencil: scoped styles in light DOM](https://stenciljs.com/docs/styling#scoped-css)
- [BEM: Block, Element, Modifier](https://en.bem.info/)

> ## Detailed design

Author: > I would personally favor a strong signal

This seems unnecessary to me, since we don't already do this for existing `*.css` files. Developers can include or omit the `*.css` file, and the compiler will pick it up automatically. Why shouldn't it be the same for `*.scoped.css` files? If we're going to have a new system for scoped CSS, I would prefer extending it back to regular CSS as well – even if it's a breaking change, it would be better for consistency.

I admit `<style scoped>` would be more preferable from the perspective of maintaining Rollup/Jest/etc. plugins, but again, it's a totally different system from existing CSS, and it wouldn't be clear to developers why they need one system for one and another system for the other. Also it would raise the question of why we don't allow "single file" components ala Vue/Svelte - e.g. a `<script>` tag containing the JS directly inlined in the HTML.

> ### Scoping token

Author: I'll add something about this. I agree that in my own mental model, applying the scope token to the root element also felt kind of weird. But it felt weirder _not_ to have it, since otherwise `x-foo` doesn't work.

> ### Scoping token

Author: Done, added a section.

In general, there are two approaches for applying scoping tokens to the DOM: classes or attributes. Both have [the same CSS specificity](https://alistapart.com/article/braces-to-pixels/#section4), but [historically](https://github.com/threepointone/glamor/issues/339) and [presently](https://github.com/salesforce/lwc/pull/2329), classes are faster than attributes in terms of the browser's [style calculation](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/rendering/#the_pixel_pipeline) process. So we prefer classes.

This means that, with scoped styles, all CSS selectors inside of the `*.scoped.css` file will have an added class, which scopes the rules to that particular component.

For example, the user might author:

```css
div > .bar {}
```

This is compiled to:

```css
div.x-foo_foo > .bar.x-foo_foo {}
```

Any existing classes in the template will be merged with the scoping token classes.

### Comparisons with synthetic shadow DOM

The current design of LWC's synthetic shadow scoped styles has several features that we do not want to emulate with light DOM scoped styles:

- Using attributes over classes.
- Allowing `@import` to import other CSS files.

> - Evaluating scoped CSS at runtime rather than compile time.

Author: I mean the fact that we generate a function that takes the scoping token as input and outputs a string, rather than just generating a string server-side. I'll make it clearer here.

In theory, a light DOM component can target its own root element in both global and scoped styles by using its own tag name, e.g. `x-component`:

```css
x-component {
    background: red;
}
```

The problem with this approach is that templates do not really "own" their tag names. A subclass of a `LightningElement`, for instance, could end up with a totally different tag name. Or we may rename tags at the platform level. Therefore it's not safe for developers to use this technique to "guess" their own tag name.

This is why we support the `:host` selector in scoped CSS instead.

## Adoption strategy

Light DOM components are already opt-in (using `static renderMode = 'light'`), and scoped light DOM styles would also be opt-in, using `*.scoped.css`.

# How we teach this

Conceptually, scoped light DOM styles will have to be bundled up into a larger discussion of light DOM versus shadow DOM. Because switching between the two will never be as simple as flipping a boolean flag, and because the differences between the two can have a wide-ranging impact, we have to be careful about how we communicate the differences to developers.

# Unresolved questions

> There are no unresolved questions at this time.

Author: To add: should `*.css` be the global, or should it be the scoped one, and `*.global.css` is the global one? In Vue, global is the default, whereas in Svelte, scoped is the default. There are different intuitions about this, so it's not clear one or the other is the best.

Reviewer 2: Is there any support for `slot` in this world?

Reviewer 2: Anything different about custom properties? 

Thinking of this extreme case, what would the color of the slotted `span` be? `cornflowerblue` or `blue`?

```html
<x-app>
  <style>
    :root {
      --color-red: red;
      --color-blue: blue;
    }
  </style>
  <style class="x-foo_foo" type="text/css">
    div.x-foo_foo { 
      --color-red: maroon; 
      color: var(--color-blue); 
    }
    div.x-foo_foo span {
      --color-blue: cornflowerblue; 
    }
  </style>
  
  <div class="x-foo_foo">
    <h2>Hello</h2>
    <x-bar>
      #shadowRoot
        <style>
          h2 {
            color: var(--color-red);
          }
          ::slotted(span) {
            color: var(--color-blue)
          }
        </style>
        <h2>Hello</h2>
        <slot>↦ span</slot>
      #lightdom
      <span>slotted element</span>
    </x-bar>
  </div>
</x-app>
```

Author: This was a bit of a brain-teaser, so I wrote [a demo](https://github.com/nolanlawson/lwc-barebone/commit/167c105edb0a20ed89b0152426966099144de184). 🙂 

Looks like the answer is cornflower blue. It's a bit confusing because both `color` and custom properties are inherited, but basically yes, the `--color-blue` inherits down from the `<div>`.

![Screen Shot 2021-09-30 at 12 47 48 PM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/283842/135521008-b25fa6aa-6b65-4fef-8af2-a9304b3c502c.png)

(Using Firefox but it's the same in Chrome; just easier to see in Firefox since Chrome doesn't visualize constructable stylesheets very well.)

---
title: Light DOM Scoped Styles
status: DRAFTED
created_at: 2021-05-14
updated_at: YYYY-MM-DD
champion: Nolan Lawson (nolanlawson), Abdulsattar Mohammed (abdulsattar)
pr: https://github.com/salesforce/lwc-rfcs/pull/50
---

# Light DOM Scoped Styles

## Summary

> This proposal adds a mechanism for components ([#44](https://github.com/salesforce/lwc-rfcs/pull/44)) to have co-located CSS files that are scoped to that component, but without relying on shadow DOM.

Author: @pmdartus I explicit removed the bit about "light DOM components" since this feature now works in shadow DOM components as well.

> This proposal adds a mechanism for components ([#44](https://github.com/salesforce/lwc-rfcs/pull/44)) to have co-located CSS files that are scoped to that component, but without relying on shadow DOM.

Author: I'll say "components, including light DOM components"

> This proposal adds a mechanism for components ([#44](https://github.com/salesforce/lwc-rfcs/pull/44)) to have co-located CSS files that are scoped to that component, but without relying on shadow DOM.

Reviewer 3: Perfect.

```

The result will be:

```html
<x-app>
  <style class="x-foo_foo" type="text/css">
    div.x-foo_foo { color: green; }
  </style>
  <div class="x-foo_foo">Hello</div>
</x-app>
```

## Motivation

For ([light DOM components](./0114-light-dom.md)), the default assumption is that styles are unscoped. In other words, a light DOM component essentially just contains `<style>` tags that are inserted into the DOM _in situ_. (The actual implementation may be slightly different, but this is the basic mental model.)

Many frameworks, however, have a concept of _scoped styles_, even without using shadow DOM. These offer good developer ergonomics, because developers can concentrate on the CSS co-located with a particular component, without worrying how that CSS might affect other components.

Prior art:

- [Vue: `<style scoped>`](https://vue-loader.vuejs.org/guide/scoped-css.html)
- [Svelte: scoped styles](https://svelte.dev/docs#style)
- [React: CSS Modules in `create-react-app`](https://create-react-app.dev/docs/adding-a-css-modules-stylesheet/)
- [Stencil: scoped styles in light DOM](https://stenciljs.com/docs/styling#scoped-css)
- [BEM: Block, Element, Modifier](https://en.bem.info/)

> Furthermore, scoped styles are useful even for shadow DOM. Consider a shadow parent component with a light child component: the parent's styles "bleed" into the child, which may be surprising for developers who are accustomed to the Vue/Svelte model.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph is confusing me a bit, are you saying scoped styles would prevent the bleeding of styles?

```html
<x-app>
  <style class="x-foo_foo" type="text/css">
    div.x-foo_foo { color: green; }
  </style>
  <x-bar>
    #shadowroot
      <style>
        h2 { color: red; }
      </style> 
      <h2 class="x-foo_foo">Hello</h2>
  </x-bar>
</x-app>
```

The light DOM element with scoped styles would still render as red

Author: @brandonferrua I'm talking about this case:

```html
<x-shadow>
  #shadowroot
    <style type="text/css">
      div { color: green; }
    </style>
    <x-light>
      <div>Hello</div>
    </x-light>
</x-shadow>
```

In this case, the light DOM component's `<div>` will have `color: green`, which may surprise developers who think of shadow DOM styles as "scoped." (It's "scoped," but not in the same way most JS frameworks talk about scoping!)
